>> Good morning.
How you guys doing this morning?
It's a little bit early on a Thursday.
And I'm Geoff Stahl, and I'm going to be
talking about the OpenGL Shading Language.
One thing I wanted to do at the start of this
presentation is actually kind of see a show of hands on,
on what people's familiarity with it, because I can,
I can gauge my talk to how the
audience is, what you guys want to hear.
So, who has never used GLSL or
OpenGL Shading Language at all?
So, probably about two-thirds of the room.
That's good, that's good.
Who is, who's, say they're pretty familiar with it?
So, about a third or so.
So, I, Ok, that's good.
We can, we can work with that.
So, the first thing I'm going to talk
about, which will really hit the people
who have not used it is, what is GLSL and why do you care?
And I think that what I'm going to show you today will
be, will really show you that if you're coming to OpenGL
or if you may have traditional GL application or
even if you're thinking about it and you're not sure,
that GLSL gives you a really good entry into
working with OpenGL and getting the system
to do exactly what you want it to
do, which is sometimes daunting.
I think I've, I've talked to people before and one
of the things we've talked about and when you look
at like core animation and Core Image and
some of those technologies that Apple has,
we've divided those technologies out as
really easy to enter, easy to use technologies
but below them they're sitting on OpenGL.
Sometimes complicated ways, sometimes
not so complicated ways.
But GLSL is another entry point, which I think really
actually makes it really easy to enter and use the power
of GPU for your application, whether
it's a 3D app or a 2D app,
and not have to learn every nuance
of a very thick OpenGL specification.
So, basically GLSL, OpenGL Shading Language is a high level
C like language and it's integrated into the OpenGL API
and allows access to the power of the GPU.
So, first thing we'll do is just
look at a piece of code up here
and that code gives you an idea
that it looks familiar to you.
If you're a C programmer, it looks
very similar to what, what you'd see.
But it has a few kind of specifiers
on the variables of the beginning.
There's an attribute, a uniform and a varying.
And what that does is basically is a qualifier to tell the
compiler what you're going to be doing with these variables.
The attributes are like coming in through the vertex path.
Uniforms are like constants.
And varyings come out from a vertex
shader and go into a fragment shader
and are interpolated when they're in a fragment shader.
So that's kind of qualifiers there.
Then there's a main, which you would expect.
And then we have what you would
really, except for the kind of built
in function there, something you can really understand.
It's a... There's a mix function that's built into GLSL.
We take an input, which is the GL underscores or
all the built ins, and we applied a waiting on it.
Understand here though that GLSL is a vector language.
So that's a vec 4 so we have four components there.
We're mixing across all four components with that wait.
So it's really nice and you can start
thinking about problems in that way.
Texture coord, again, it's a GL underscore
so it's a built in and we pull some texture coords out
and then we have a, we calculate a position.
The last line is basically what the fixed function pipeline
does in OpenGL to calculate, transform your vertex.
So it transforms it from 3D space
into basically screen space.
So that just shows what you're looking at.
So, why do you care about GLSL
Why is GLSL interesting to you?
Why is it easier?
I mean, some people say it's a
programming language, I don't, you know,
calling functions might be easier than that.
But this is, really is, what I've found is with the
tools that we give you, some of the sample code we have
and some of the stuff out there on the web
and some of the things you can do yourself,
you really can tailor a solution to your problem.
So it's approachable.
It's very easy to use and I'll show you that.
It's understandable.
We already said it's a C like language.
So that's pretty easy.
It's direct.
You can directly do what you'd want to do.
So in some cases in OpenGL you may
have to use the texture combiners
to actually combine different textures
to get certain effects.
Well now you can actually just blend them in a C program.
And it's fast.
Access is a GPU.
So the newest features of the newest GPU's, the
way you get them is through GLSL on Mac OS X.
And it's an industries focus, the ARB Industry Standards
Group is working to improve and expand and continue
to develop OpenGL Apple as a part,
a very active part of this
and it's Apple's focus as far as moving forward with GPU.
So you're on a technology that we move forward.
Next year when you come here we're talking about
GLSL, the year after we're talking about GLSL.
Let's jump in to some of the points
and dive a little bit deeper.
So it's approachable.
Basically it's simple to set up and easy to experiment with.
You don't need a lot of OpenGL knowledge.
And so what I'm going to show is this
little example here and we're going
to look at this live and show you what it does.
So, someone out here has an image processing app and
they've seen Core Image and say, hey that's pretty good,
but I want to write a little bit differently.
I want to do some of my own stuff.
So what do I do?
I can write an edge detection filter in GLSL very
simply and just apply it to a texture and if I look
and load the texture in I can apply
an edge detection filter.
And I can modify this.
I can work with it.
And so let's go right into a demo and see
how someone could easily bring this up.
So, there's a piece of sample code on all
year, that's been around for about a year now.
It's called GLSL Sample Editor.
And I'm going to use that as kind of the editor example.
The reason I'm using it is because
you have it on your DVD's.
It's in the sample code under OpenGL and Cocoa.
And you can write your GLSL shaders
just like I'm doing on stage here.
You can write them and experiment with them, you know,
not while the presentation's going on but maybe after.
So this is the edge detection filter.
It might be a little bit hard to read but I'll walk
through, I'll talk about what I'm doing with it.
I'm not sure if this even works.
I don't think I hooked that up.
But, so at the beginning I talked about constants.
In the first line it says sampler 2D rec.
And all a sampler is is basically
something that accesses a texture.
It's a 2D rec, so it's a rectangular texture.
So I have to load that.
So let's, let's look at our little rendering window,
or look in the shader program here and
I have a texture tab we put in here.
This is all in the sample code.
This is all just compile, run the sample code.
And there's a texture in here.
We have a type.
I'll make it rectangular just so it works with
the shader so it works with the shader I wrote.
Now what does this shader do?
It basically, This is a kernel filter.
It takes the center point that you're sampling, multiply
by negative four and then takes the surrounding,
takes the X and Y, takes the vertical and
horizontal surrounding pixels and multiplies them
by one point 0 in this case and does an edge detection.
So it basically, when it crosses the boundary
you're just going to change the color.
We have a texture input, we have this.
What I'm going to do is, this is the
equivalent of calling use program in OpenGL.
And down here, let's bring this a little
bit bigger so you guys can see it.
So, I am going to contend that this, that that five lines of
OpenGL in vector space is, makes an edge detection filter.
Ok, great.
Well, then I have to type code to change things.
Well, what's, what's the one thing we can do in
OpenGL or GLSL that I mentioned about constants?
So if we look at constants we have a constant here, a point
five and a five and we have some of these one point 0's.
So let's throw something in here to make it a little
bit, show you how easy it is to experiment with this.
So I'm going to add another uniform and we're compiling on
the fly and I'm going to make it called adjust and I'm going
to make it, actually I'm going to make it
a vec three because I want three values
and I'll call it adjust, and so that's my.
And what I'll do is, remember this is a vector, so I'll
simply paste it in here, make that the X component,
make that the Y component and I'll make the, the,
how big the kernel is I'll make that the Z component.
So this is the offset in that texture sampler.
So I'll make that the Z. There's
a minus one and there's a plus one here
and there's one more plus one and we do that.
So now we have this variable that we've added in
that's a constant coming in, your API specifies this.
And you can adjust this.
So now we can adjust the intensity, we can adjust an
offset level and we adjust the size of our filter.
Again, these five lines of code.
In this sample we have this, You see
adjust came up in our uniform tab.
We talked about uniforms.
And so now we have these sliders.
And so, if you notice, that's my,
the first thing was my base level.
So that goes from basically black to white.
And we're doing alpha too so that's
why it goes back to the gray graph.
We'll put that at 50 percent.
We'll make the intensity can go to 100
and the offset can go to 10.
So now, we bring this up and we bring that up and you can
see, we'll make actually this a little bit lower to 15.
So that's basically what we had before.
But you can increase the intensity of
your edge detection through the uniform.
One variable is going down to the GPU right now.
It's all in the GPU.
You can, again, control the base line
and you control the size of the kernel
that you're actually filtering on to get edges.
So this is real similar to what you would see in Core Image.
Again, GLSL, real similar.
Got some basic five lines of code and then
I can play with it and I can experiment.
I can build that filter or whatever I'm looking at.
So. And so my point is there is that
GLSL, you didn't need to know any OpenGL,
except for maybe the texture code, the
rest was your solving your problem.
It's solving the problem of, hey, I want a kernel filter.
So I'm going to go back to the slides.
So it's understandable.
We've already seen that the code is pretty clear.
It's straight forward the program.
I gave the texture combiner example.
If you're in OpenGL you can do lots of texture combiners.
But maybe that's not what you want to do,
maybe you just want to blend something.
So, this was using color mask,
and I wrote this four years ago.
It may not be the best code in
the world but, oh my God, I mean,
if I put it on the slide that would be four or five slides.
Let me tell you how to do a color
mask and turn components on and off.
Not what I want to do.
So, let's look at equivalent kind of blend color, color
masking to control, color component control in GLSL.
So that's the fragment program
that does basically the same thing.
And what this does basically, if you
notice, is a contribution uniform value.
We talked about that.
It does a, It has textural look-up
and does the vector multiply.
Remember, we're working in vector space.
And then it gets a color.
So all you're doing is you have an adjustment
now for the different color components.
So if you want to have a blender
that changes color components,
again in like an image processing app, very simple.
So we'll go back to the demo machine.
And so we'll use this program and, if
we look at, Again, we go to textures
and this is a texture rectangle, look at uniforms.
So the contribution is the only uniform I have
up there and the contribution is all maxed out.
But let's say I want to turn down the red channel or I
want to turn down the green channel or the blue channel.
And so you can also can do it this way
and you could do something like this.
We go turn it up.
You can see, let me move this, make this bigger, then
you can see that depending, and this is just, you know,
we're just sending a single uniform in and on the GPU it's
doing the blend itself with a one line shader, get direct.
You're actually affecting what, It's very clear.
You're effecting exactly what you want to do.
And with our, sample editor you can always take any
image you want, dump it in and you can say, you know,
you want to dim it out, you know,
you want to, sorry, brighten it.
And I need to redraw it.
I'll just do this, oops, uniforms, there
we go, back to editing my uniforms, there we go.
That's what I wanted to do.
There you go.
So it works with any image.
So we'll go back to the slides.
Says color control and blending.
The example was you can do a lot of different ways in OpenGL
and there's probably better ways
than I showed you in the code.
Obviously I was trying to make a point there.
But the example is there is a lot of code that you set up
OpenGL state and manipulate state and set contributions.
In GLSL you actually just write the code you want to write.
So it's also direct.
You can accomplish what you, what
you're, what you really want to do.
And we showed that in the other example.
But the point here is you can actually
get direct access to features of the GPU.
So the GPU has improved fragment programs, has looping
and branching and conditionals, has geometry shader.
All these things are exposed through GLSL.
So if you want to, for example, do some kind of fractal
pattern where you actually kind of build geometry on the fly
on the GPU without using the CPU you
can do that using a geometry shader.
If you want to have a loops and you want
to do conditional discarding of pixels.
You want to punch holes depending on values coming in
you can do it, but you can do it if my value coming in,
my texture look-up value is less than point
five for alpha I want to discard that fragment.
And so you punch a whole through it.
I mean, it's directly representing what you want to do.
So, for example, I have this fairly long kind of complicated
thing here, which is actually not that complicated.
It's actually an interesting little piece of a shader.
You notice there's some vec three's and it's
greater than and it does basically a texture look-up
as we've seen before, a surrounding texture look-up,
to get some count, and the count is neighbors.
How many neighbors do we have?
It's doing it in three channels,
or four channels at one time.
So I think, I'm sorry, it's three channels at one time.
And then it, then there's an if statement.
If the vec equals three cell gets one, alpha stays the same.
So some people might be thinking, I've seen this before.
The key I want to point here is with the conditionals.
Instead of having to do some kind of funky, you know, tricky
logic, you actually have the ability to get conditionals.
You have the equal.
You have the greater than or equal, less or equal, which
is basically the mathematical operation built into GLSL
that you can use to do conditional,
conditional processing on that.
So this is the equivalent of having
a number of if statements.
And I'll get back to what this is, I assume some
of you can probably figure out where that's going.
It's just an interesting of GLSL.
The last thing I want to talk about is fast.
So it's optimized with high and low level compilers.
We put a compiler technology behind your GLSL program.
We compile it.
We send it to the driver vendors.
They have their own hardware specific compilers.
They compile it.
And we really work hard to make
sure the GLSL works really well.
And that's where we're putting our efforts in.
So this is something to take, to
leverage, take advantage of.
You can use more complex constructs and
then take advantage of that in GLSL.
Power of the GPU.
The GPU, the X1900, for example, is speced
at 9 giga pixels per second of fill rate.
This isn't, you know, if you're clearing, this is not
doing complex, this is exactly the high level rill rate.
And so if we take that and put that on to a 30 inch display.
What does that give you?
So a 30 inch display is 2500 by 1600.
How many frames could you clear, can you actually
write to the memory, how many pixels can clear?
That's about 24,000, I'm sorry, 2400 frames per second.
So there's a lot of power in that
card, a lot of power to use.
Using it wisely and using it well in your
application can really differentiate your application
and can make you be able to do
things you couldn't do on the CPU.
I mean, imagine if you had to process
a four mega pixel frame
on the CPU an upload it across the bus every single time.
So move that to the GPU, move that to the GPU and I think
you'll see great, great things will happen with your app.
41 gigabytes in memory bandwidth in our new laptops,
the fill rate on those is seven
point six giga pixels per second.
So it's approaching the desktop level of fill rate.
So large displays well supported,
larger set of pixels well supported.
So let's go back to the demo machine.
And I want to do one fairly quick last demo.
And that is something that I showed you before a piece
of and it's not, you can do a lot more with the GPU
but it's just an interesting use of directly programming
the GPU and showing kind of what the power is.
It's running on a laptop and, let me see
if I can get this right and it'll work.
There's, there we go.
So that wasn't very interesting.
That might be interesting.
This is, If I can zoom in.
This is Life running entirely on the GPU
and it runs at, for this implementation,
it's getting about 100 mega pixels per second,
running at 90 frames per second for the entire screen.
It runs three versions of Life at the same time.
So each channel has it running simultaneously.
You see red, green, blue are running
independently and simultaneously.
The nugget of code I showed you
before was the conditional statement
that determines whether it's alive
or dead and counts neighbors.
So the deal here is not, you know, it's a little fun
game but it's an interesting use of the power of the GPU
to do all on the GPU to do kind of fragment level
processing that is not, so to speak, image processing.
Let's see if I can get just one more quick one here.
So you can see we can reseed it at, again, about
100 mega pixels per second running Life on the GPU.
And this is included in the OpenGL, GLSL
showpiece, which is, again, on your developer DVD.
It's been on there for about a year.
It's just an interesting idea for a shader.
You can look at it.
You can play with it, get new ideas.
But again, you can run it on the GPU directly affect,
you know, directly accomplish a task here at hand.
In this case we're just playing the game of Life.
So it's kind of fun.
So we'll go back to the slide machine.
So that was my, Let's introduce kind of GLSL,
give you a feel for what you can do with it,
get you thinking about it's not just about drawing
polygons, drawing vertices, drawing fragments.
So I'm going to cover a bunch of things.
First I'm going to talk about a shader.
I'm going to break it down so people who haven't used
GLSL, I'm going to talk about how to get it set up.
So we gave you some tools that can already do it but
you really want to know how you can write some code.
You can fool with the shaders by themselves and
then there's some API stuff we'll put in there.
Then I'll talk about GLSL and Leopard.
And we'll talk about what we have and where it's going.
We'll talk about working a little bit with hardware,
which is something that everyone will want to worry about.
And then we'll talk about fourth generation
shader support, which is now going to be
in Leopard for our new hardware and on software.
So let's talk about shaders, jump right in.
So first thing is this is a image provided by Moto by
Luxology, just to zoom in on one of their renderings.
Obviously this is not the full rendering.
You want to kind of look at what constitutes this 3D scene.
So first thing we're going to add a grid to it.
So this is the grid of vertices that
is used to draw the 3D geometry.
Remember each point on here is a vertex.
Vertex shaders operate on vertices.
So every single point that is sent to the GPU, the GPU is
going to do, execute your program one time for each vertex.
So if there's a thousand vertices here, you have
a thousand iterations on that vertex shader.
If we zoom in a bit you can see that the grid makes
up the geometry and we'll highlight a triangle.
This is a primitive.
And a primitive, in this case, is just a simple triangles.
Triangles are operated on by geometry shaders.
So the geometry shader operates at a primitive level.
Three vertices fed into a geometry shader, geometry
shader can decide to put out three vertices,
decide I want more vertices, decide to put out no vertices.
So a geometry shader basically is
working on that at the primitive level.
If we move down and we zoom in even further the primitive
in screen space, so in the space that's facing you
when you rasterize it, is made up of pixels.
So if a primitive is very oblique, I guess is the right
word, to you, you have a very, It may only be four
or fives lines of fragments on the
screen or pixels on the screen.
As it comes to be plainer it kind of grows in scope.
The point here I'm making is, is
that the fragment processing operates
on every single pixel that's included in that primitive.
So it operates basically scans across.
Your fragment program operates on every single, The
fragment shader operates on every single one of those.
So you can imagine if you have a thousand triangles
stacked it still operates on every single one of those.
You can be blending.
It needs to get the results.
So that's when you call depth complexity,
when you have things stacked.
In this case we're just talking about a single triangle.
So that's, those are kind of the scope of things.
Vertices, primitives, fragments and it goes
from a thousand to maybe a million in a scene.
So understand that when we're thinking
about where you want to do work.
This is something we're not going to talk about today.
We're not going to talk about the
OpenGL fix function pipeline.
Fix function pipeline.
We put this slide up every year, this is out of
the red book and this is OpenGL, great, yeah.
It takes some time to talk about this and in reality
a lot of the things in it are things you'll use
but they're not things that you really want to spend a
lot of time explaining, you know, what a display list is.
So we're going to talk about a different pipeline.
We're going to talk about this pipeline.
So basically this has some vertex attributes
coming in position, for example, color.
Go through a vertex shader, goes to a
geometry shader, goes to a fragment shader.
They all can reference texture data and outputs
to the frame buffer, your screen, whatever.
This is the OpenGL programmable pipeline.
So there's nuances to it and there's more depth
you could go into, but the point here is that GLSL
and using shaders allows you to directly manipulate data
and simplify the pipeline and allow you to concentrate
on what you guys do best rather than learning a 200 page
API spec. It allows you to learn exactly the pieces you know
and learn to, and code to things that are leverage
work we do to make your problem, solve your problem.
Additional piece we're going to talk about
a little bit today is transform feedback.
And that's an additional stage that is new with the
fourth generation shading support and it allows you
to take the output of a geometry shader,
build new primitives, as we talked about,
and feed them back in to have kind of
a feedback loop, transform feedback.
So it's transformed and fed back in.
So what is a vertex shader?
I think we've covered a lot of this already but really
it replaces a transform and texture coord and generation.
Transform, texture coord and generation
and lighting parts of OpenGL.
So that first piece.
So calculating the light positions, transforming
the vertices from a 3D space to a 2D space.
In many cases you can do kind of your, If you're
doing image processing kind of things more
than vertex processing you can just
drop in a piece of existing code.
You can also do set up for lighting.
You can do set up for bump mapping.
You can do set up for some geometry shader.
So it's a very worthwhile piece.
An in a little while I'm going to talk about why you really
want to remember that you do have a vertex shader to use.
Because forgetting the vertex shader and putting everything
in the fragment shader sometimes the
economy of scale is not very good.
And we'll talk about that in a few slides.
The input is like vertices for vertex data,
which you call attributes,
which I've covered already and state like uniform.
So constants, things that change for vertex and the vertices
themselves, which vertices you could say change per vertex.
But basically the idea here is if you
have a color per vertex you're going
to get a new color, you're going to get a vertex position.
You can make it a new texture coordinate.
And you can use these however you'd
like to use them for your vertex shader.
And kind of the connection you want to make here
is if you're thinking why is this texture coord
in an OpenGL and I get data in my vertex shader.
I'm not, I'm not really sure, you
know, how do I get basic data in?
Well, you have these, all these things, vertex, vertices,
color, texture coordinates are basic just buckets
of flow data, buckets of vec four flow data.
So if you think about them in that way
you can make them generic attributes.
If I want to put in four float numbers into
my vertex shader I send some vertices in.
I do a draw arrays call.
I set up some other arrays that are basically
just have my flow data, just array of flow data.
And the vertex shader gets them and
you can address them as flow data.
You can call them whenever you want.
So you can actually not think about it in
the texture coordinate kind of mentality.
You can actually think about it in the, I
just have vertices and then I have some data.
So, in this case, for a simple shader all you're going to
do is get a color value that you're passing on in a varying
and varying are sent through the geometry
shader to the fragment shader and interpolated.
That was that interpolation.
I'll talk to you about that in a minute.
And then F transform is a built in function that
does the standard fix function vertex transform.
This could be a vertex shader for many people that
would just do enough of what you want it to do.
You could probably get away with this for many
functions of GLSL that you're going to play with.
So you don't need to write a lot of code.
So geometry shader.
Geometry shader is new for Leopard.
It's supported in both software and on the new generation
hardware, new generations of hardware and it's run
after the vertices are transformed but prior to the color
clamping, flash shading, all the rasterization stage of it.
So basically it kind of fits in the middle.
I originally had kind of this, you know, I would
think a geometry shader wants to run first.
You want it to run like before
everything else and build geometry.
Well, in this case, you actually want to
do the transform and you have the option
to modify, build, feedback additional geometry.
So think about it in that way.
You have some geometry that you transformed into
screen space and then you can do more things with it.
I think if you were at the modernizing session
you saw we did some shadow volume stuff.
You can do extrusion.
You can draw additional lines.
You can look at adjacencies.
And Alex is going to come up at the
end and talk about geometry shaders
and show you some things that you can do with it.
It's really, really interesting.
And it does more than you think it can do because
you've got to remember that you're really working
with basic building blocks and you can
build them in a lot of different ways.
So it's part of your construction set,
you know, your modern day tinker toys.
And it does more than just, you know, build a bridge.
You can build all kinds of things.
And it outputs vertices to define the primitive.
So basically the idea here is that you can, in this
case I have just a very simple triangle geometry shader,
which is a pass through shader, sets the colors.
So the color or the colors being put out, the
front color in position are colors that'll come in.
So if you think about this, the geometry shader,
instead of having a single vertex come
in has three, in this case triangles.
So it has a zero one and two in an array.
It reads each of them and does an emit vertex.
The emit vertex says send the vertex further out.
So geometry shaders, you don't, you don't particularly
need to understand how they work if you're not using them.
But in this case it actually is a pretty simple concept.
So this, again, this is just a pass through geometry shader.
Fragment shaders, we've been talking about those.
I've been manipulating those in the talk, showing
you what kind of things you can do with those.
And basically they operate on a per
fragment state, per fragment basis.
So every, every pixel on the screen that you
touch, your fragment shader is operating on it.
If you draw it twice, your fragment
shader is going to operate twice.
It replaces but through the rasterization,
kind of fix function rasterization.
Inputs are transform vertices and associated data.
They're varyings.
And why is it called a varying vice, you
know, Why is a position does not come back in?
Think about this.
Ok, if you think about the, the triangle we drew and
you show that the line of pixels that comes across it,
and that is actually, Just think, let's make it a line.
Let's make one end of the line is a red
color, one end of the line is a blue color
and you want to draw the fragment shader.
Well, fragment shaders have to touch every fragment
that's going to be shown on the screen so it interpolates.
And it turns out that color coming through will
be automatically interpolated by the hardware.
So at one end you get pure blue, one
end you get pure red and every place
in between the incoming color is interpolated.
So if you want to think about that when you get,
If you have a constant color every thing's white.
You just get white.
But if you want to, you know, colorize
something you can use that vertex color coming in
and every fragment may have a different variation
of that vertex color on that interpolation.
And, So in this case, this is actually the wrong shader.
I apologize.
The, We've seen some fragment shaders.
The idea with the fragment shader is you can
actually put out the frag color at the end.
And I'll show you one.
Well, actually why don't we go to the demo machine
so I can show you a better fragment shader.
We'll show you the one line, the
one liner that I showed you before.
So, in this case, the key here is this frag color
and that frag color is the output color and then all
of this is going to do is do a texture look-up.
So this is a basic fragment shader.
The frag color is, The texture
coordinate is the incoming, incoming data.
The frag color is the required output.
If you don't write the frag color the
output of a fragment shader is undefined
So we can go back to slides.
So, let's talk about using the API a little bit.
In utopian world you guys just all
start coding GLSL and everything works.
Well, you'll have to do a little bit of OpenGL
API to kind of get things wired together.
So, extensions.
In Leopard all the top three extensions and the,
basically the fourth one there are supported.
But you should still be checking for extensions.
OpenGL has a core set of features.
It also has a set of extensions.
Make sure when you use an extension you actually
check with it so if new hardware comes out,
maybe something gets replaced, maybe we have a new version
of something, you actually know what version you're using.
The next one, the fourth generation shader
support is two of the pieces you can use.
If you want to use GPU shader, which
we'll talk about, or geometry shader,
those are the extensions you check
for to make sure they're supported.
Again, our plan is have a hardware support
pretty much across the board for these.
I'm sorry, software support for across the
board and hardware support on the GPU's
that actually are able to do geometry shaders.
So those are the extensions.
Simple thing here is the three last steps are
basically what you have to do to wire things up.
You have to create your shaders and load the code.
You have to create a program object,
which is just a container and you have
to attach the shaders to that program objects.
And the program objects basically says I want to operate on
this vertex shader and this fragment shader and I'm going
to put them in my program object and
I'll bind that to make it current.
So we can imagine that you have,
like Core Image for example.
Core image would have different effects and different
shaders and they would bind them all up and they would have,
They would bind whichever one you've selected
as the one you want to make, make active now.
When I said use, for example, in the example, that
was the same thing, that was using the shader.
The, What you can do with this model is you can take,
Let's say you have a single vertex shader that works
for all your fragment shaders, you have a single vertex
shader and a you have a bunch of fragment shaders
and you combine, combine them, combine that one
to multiple programs that they can cross over.
So they're discreet objects.
And then you're going to link it like
you would do for normal for a program.
You're going to use it and you're going to draw with it.
Create and shaders.
Create shader object.
You're creating objects as a standard OpenGL API there.
And you can be like vertex shader,
fragment shader or geometry shader.
You're going to supply the source code.
And there's a pointer there, which
basically says this is my text source code.
At that point you can, after that you can call compile.
We have logs.
You either, you can check for errors.
You can look at the logs if you, Actually, let's
jump back to the demo machine for a second.
Let me put a error down to show you kind of what it does.
So if I just, if I just do that
you notice we highlight a red line.
Well, the simple way we do that is we get the error log.
The error log, it says EC4 instead of vec 4.
There's no matching overloaded function.
It tells me a line number and it
says assigned, it can't convert.
So it puts an error up.
So, again, if I make that instead of EC4, I make it
back to vec 4, which it recognizes, the log is empty.
Ok, back to slides.
So, the part I don't show you here is
that it's a simple function to get a log.
It's a text file and we use it, for example, on our
sample code to actually give you that interactive editing.
You can get it in your program and just make sure that
the compile succeeded and there's no error or you can put
out to the console, whatever you'd like to do.
Creating a program object, similar.
Create a program object, you attach your two shaders
that you're going to use and you're done with that.
Let's move into linking.
Link program.
You have a program object, you have attached your shaders,
you link it, you use your program object, you draw something
and then you can use null to turn off that GLSL, that's it.
You obviously have to have some geometry, you have
to have some textures and those kinds of things.
That's pretty standard OpenGL.
There's lots of examples.
You can tear apart our samples and use whatever you
want out of them if you have the basis for that.
If you're not familiar with those pieces in OpenGL or
you might have a lot of stuff set-up already to do that.
But, in any case, my point is that it's
not that hard to get from where you are,
I haven't used GLSL before, to using GLSL.
We talked about constants.
There's a uniform API that allows you to set constants.
This is entirely something new.
Remember, we have a compiler, we have a linker
and we have symbols on the backend of OpenGL now.
So how do you tie in stuff in the front?
Like I have three, I want to put
a three into that, in to fu.
How do I get fu?
Well, this is basically called get uniform location, my
uniform is fu and it returns basically an opaque value.
You don't really need to, You don't
want to iterate on the value.
There's rules about how you can use this
for a raise and those kinds of things.
But in this case basically assume it's an opaque value
and then you're going to use the uniform 4FV in this case.
So this is basically going to set any, a
set of uniforms but it's going to set them
to the value you have, F. F is a vec 4 there.
And you're basically going to set
that value using the GL uniform API.
So this is loading those four values in to a
uniform, which the is again sent to your shading.
Remember, this is a constant API.
So what this is, if you have like user time interactions.
So in user time interactions I was dragging those things
around, you know, once, you know, once every few seconds,
once every, you know, a few times a second and
those kinds of things, constants can work great.
If you have things that are running per
vertex you don't want to use a uniform.
So, for example, if you're trying to do lighting, don't
use uniform because lighting should be in those attributes,
those things that'll change every vertex.
So you have to understand that there's a
kind of a, I don't want to say a pipe size,
but it's kind of a rate of change that's assumed here.
Uniforms, you can do a lot of things in uniforms
and they're very convenient but you don't want
to do things that change like on a per vertex basis.
So, that's kind of brushing across the top
of GLSL as far as getting up and going,
where do you turn to get more information
about the built in functions,
the built in variables, attributes, varyings, uniforms?
OpenGL Shading Language orange book, really good book.
It's a kind of a combination of the
previous red book and blue book.
It has a reference in it, which is good for
people who know GLSL but it also has a lot
about the shading language and a ton of examples in it.
A lot of the GLSL show piece examples that we have, that you
have on your developer DVD come from this book and they're
up and running for you so you can play with them.
They have a good interface and all that kind of stuff.
So, I would suggest that if you're interested
in GLSL you go out and get the orange book.
I also always suggest that the spec is a
good thing to have by, download the spec,
make sure you have it because in the end the orange
book could have a typo or we could have changed the spec
and it's really important to actually
have that reference with you.
So let's talk about working with hardware.
So, one thing that's really apparent once you start
working with GLSL is if you have, let me think of something
that I don't offend someone in the crowd,
let me, you're, you're first, I got it, the,
the old Wall Street laptop that's a, that's a, maybe
it's a Rage128, maybe it was a Rage2 processor.
It's not the same as today's GPU.
So if you really have some really, really crufty old
hardware you can still work in software but understand
that you want to, you need to understand what the
hardware's capable of because it really matters
for what the hardware support for GLSL is.
( Silence )
So we're going to do five ways to stay
in hardware and to make your life happy.
Use Moto (sp?) hardware that gets back to my,
my, the old, the old brown PowerBook that,
At this point I don't even know if it was brown laptop.
At this point the new hardware that will come out is
hugely better than what we've had in generations past.
The brand new hardware on our laptops in now
capable of the fourth generation shading language.
So really the hardware support is amazing these days.
So, vertex/fragment program-capable hardware
is required to get hardware GLSL support.
So if it has vertex or fragment program
support it will have GLSL, basic GLSL support.
And proof support is on the Radeon 1600 and later.
So what that means is every Intel iMac, every
Intel MacBook Pro has pretty improved GLSL support.
There's some things it still can't
do but they work really well.
Also our desktops, obviously, the desktops with the NV 7300,
ATIX 1900 or the Quadro (sp?) all
have very good GLSL support.
NVIDIA 6600 and later again, means all Intel
NVIDIA products have good support.
The exceptions to this is the MacBook,
which has reasonable support
but doesn't have the same level support
as the Pro products or as the iMac.
The fourth generation shading support, which we talked
about a little bit, is available on our newest laptops
in hardware, which is the Geforce 8600 MGT and in
Leopard you will see that we have hardware support
for geometry shader, transform feedback, GPU shader and
bindable uniforms, which make up kind of the core of a lot
of the fourth generation shading extensions.
We want, I want to emphasize that you want
to test your shaders on the target hardware.
This is not something that works
everywhere exactly the same.
You want to make sure that if you have some shader that's
reasonably complicated you want to run it and verify
that it runs on the hardware that
you're targeting to put your product on.
One thing you also can do here is to
determine where your shader is executing.
It may not be clear that, You have a very good software
fall back mechanism and in some of the high end CPU's
if your vertex shader falls back to software, I
mean, let's do a little sidetrack here.
So Alex is working on some demos and I
walk into his office and he's running it
and I'm like, is that running on hardware?
You don't know because he's working the vertex and geometry
shader side of things and really he's not sending a ton
of vertices down and geometry shader
runs really fast on a fast CPU
so you don't really know if it's on hardware or software.
So the way you can tell is we have these queries that we've
added and they've been in for a while and these allow you
to determine whether your shaders and any OpenGL
actually is running on hardware or software.
There's a vertex fragment processing part, is it running
on the GPU and there's a vertex processing query.
And these will tell you, basically
returning how they are, yes or no.
In this case they're true or false.
Sorry, one or zero.
And it'll tell you whether they actually run on the GPU.
So you compile, link and bind your shader, you can call
this and it'll tell you where it's going to execute.
I highlighted this earlier, that
you want to think in vectors.
So what you want to do is you want to actually expand
your thinking or widen your thinking out to think in,
try and put your problem into vector space.
If you can do more work at one time, that's great.
Life is a good example.
While it was drawing white on the board it actually is doing
three calculations at a time and some of the other things.
The color blending is doing three calculations at a time.
You could easily have done the color blending or the
edge filter, I could have created three uniforms,
controlled each independently, labeled
one like base and labeled one like offset
and then labeled one magnitude or something like that.
But instead I used a single vector and we can actually
pull those in in one piece, which saves, you know,
kind of saves real estate in the CPU but the big thing
is if you can execute using Y data you should do that.
So GPU is a vector processor, combine operations,
float/init, going to be wasting, I mean, it's going to be,
It has these empty components it basically does the
operation, whether you put something in it or not
or you care about it, it's going to do
the operation in the full vector format.
So if you have one value you're calculating, the other
values are actually being calculated and just discarded.
So instead use vec of something or i vec of
something so vec 3, vec 2, vec 3, vec 4, for example,
the first thing is just doing some math, some valid
code, absolutely valid, no problems with that.
But you could easily do it by setting some vectors,
adding two vectors together and you get the same values.
So that's something to keep in mind when you're
doing, you need to crease the number of instructions.
With the lower end, we talked about hardware, with lower
end GPU's the number of instructions can be limited
so you want to make sure you have a compact program.
And if you're in a fragment program remember when I
talked about processing power and talked about fill ray
and talk about bandwidth, every single time you do
a, do a, you know, go to memory pull it back in,
send it back out to the GPU memory
that's, that's doing processing.
So you're throwing away that bandwidth.
If you have a high, you know, top line
bandwidth, why don't I run so fast?
Well, if you do three adds instead of one add and
you do it on a million pixels that's, you know,
three million more adds then, or two
million more adds then you would have had
to do if you'd just combined them to a vector.
So use vertex processing when you can.
It may seem like some of the things I've talked about,
and it is, it's easy to do things in fragment programs
because they're operating on a per pixel basis, you can
think in that, Oh, it's just a pixel I can change the color.
It's great.
I can see what's going on.
Vertex for programs are really your friend.
Ok. So if you're calculating something in a fragment
program that is constant across a vertex program,
or a set of fragments or all your fragments
move that calculation into a vertex program.
Do whatever you can to get that calculation
moved out of the fragment even if you're,
Let's say you have a linear interpolation
between two values.
Think about that and get it out of the fragment.
You do not want to be linearly
interpolating in your fragment program.
So Quake 3.
We're going back a little ways but Quake
3 has about 10,000 vertices per frame.
Not too bad.
That's kind of a lot.
What does a cinema display have?
A cinema display has four million pixels.
Let's assume your program has a little bit
of overdraw so you're blending a little bit.
You're doing, Like the Mac OS X desktop has blending.
You're doing blending.
That's overdraw.
So you touch a pixel twice, 50 percent overdraw.
You're now touching six million
fragments to draw that 30 inch display.
So if you're doing something and you're drawing to
the screen, you're drawing six million fragments.
So how do you think about that?
If I have to do like calculate value A in a fragment
program and I could have done that calculated value A,
which is a constant across fragment
programs and vertex programs,
what's the relative scale of the
work that I'm kind of doing?
So, the little dot two scale is the relative workload
on your 10,000 vertices, point zero five inches.
The big thing that doesn't fit on the
screen is your relative fragment load.
New architectures or unified shader
models, unified execution units,
it sends execution units where it needs to go.
So if you were calculating that, my important value,
if you're calculating that every single fragment,
and it's actually constant, you are, it's 4000 to
one or something like that I calculated in this case.
You're doing 4000 to one extra calculations.
You want to move that work into the vertex
processor and only do it a few times.
So think about your problem in that way.
If you have some kind of gradient you're calculating that's
interesting, maybe you can make 15 vertices or 15 triangles
that show, cover the gradient rather than doing some precise
calculation in the fragment program to do the gradient
that you're actually burning fragment program cycles.
So when you zoom in you have a huge number
of fragments calculating the same value.
Think about things in that way, using a mesh, animating on
meshes, using meshes to control geometry can really be a win
when you're doing, compared to direct fragment
manipulation, if it fits your problem.
Sometimes you want to really get that, that reflection
of factor, that really nice sheen on that surface
and you really want that per fragment thing, absolutely do
that on, do that on the fragment shader but think about it
because you don't want to always be in the fragment shader.
Fragment shader is not the bucket
for every single calculation.
Remember the vertex shader, remember it's there,
it operates on a lot less, a lot less vertices.
A really good example of this is like the Core Image kind
of application where you have all of four vertices total
and you have the 30 inch display worth of zoomed in thing.
Aperture has this huge display, well you can do
it four million times or you can do it four times.
So that's a million to one kind of calculation.
So think about that when you're coding.
If it's constant move it to the vertex side.
Geometry shader, the note here is geometry
shader operates on relative to primitive.
So every primitive, every set of
three vertices, for example,
on a triangle is going to be operating geometry shader.
So geometry, these kinds of vertex shaders
are 10,000 times maybe, 10,000 vertices
and then maybe the geometry shader
operates on 4000 triangles
@
and then this fragment shader operates
a million of the pixels.
One more thing on that is vertex shader you
control the amount of data that you're getting
into them, how many triangles you have in there.
Fragment shader if they drag your window bigger your
fragment load goes way up or you can make it smaller.
So understand that you control one and
the, kind of the user controls the other.
So let's talk about branching.
So branch judiciously.
Branching is not supported overall and
every GPU is not supported very well.
So I'm going to go into some details for
people who have been using GLSL before.
If you're new, just breathe for
a little bit and we'll get back
into some more interesting for
the, for the new folks in a second.
So dynamic branching.
Geforce 5200 ATI 9600 and the Intel embedded
processors have less supported branching.
They don't really have a lot of good branching support.
So you've got to be really careful using shaders
on, shaders that use branching on those processors.
All the iMacs, MacBook Pros, any NVIDIA
Intel product have very good branching support.
It's easy to stay in hardware.
You still, in some of, everything but our newest
laptops you still may have loop iteration constraints.
So 255 is a good number.
So you don't want to really do looping more than 255.
The newest stuff is, is, really
these days are getting wide open.
If you get one of the new laptops what you'll really see
is that while it may, you may not see huge improvement
in drawing a screen but you see a huge massive
improvement in the amount, the length of shaders,
the branching you can do, the amount
of, the kind of instructions it supports
and it's just an amazingly more powerful programmable piece
of hardware with the kind of unified execution models.
So that's where those things, That's
the axis those are progressing on.
And that actually takes away a lot of this stuff.
Not so dynamic branching.
So this is your limited support thing.
So what do we want to do here?
We want to do like less than ten iterations
because we're on a loop and roll it.
So if you're going to do 100 iterations on something that
doesn't have a very large set of instructions it can operate
on anyway you don't want to, because we're
going to unroll it on these processors
because they don't support our dynamic branching.
So the key here is to use supportive loop
forms, limit the number of iterations you have.
Those two forms are basic, some basic loop forms
that do exactly what you think they would do.
You basically have an iterator.
You increment the iterator and you don't
do any other kind of calculations in there.
So basically you can loop as a constructing program but
we are, in the back end, going to unroll that for you.
So loop iterator cannot change anywhere in the loop body.
Conditioning cannot change over the loop.
Starting any iteration value should be constant
ints so you should you should constants in there.
So you should start from zero go to ten
or whatever it is, zero less than ten.
No degation to swizzle.
So you shouldn't be, Swizzling is
changing the vector pieces around.
So you shouldn't be having, use X and Y and swizzling
them to actually determine when your loop ends.
And avoid complex loop parts.
For example, the first one can be
simplified in to the second one.
So the first one basically is, I have
kind of the bail out case in my loop.
So I have the loop iterates five times and then I want
to bail out if something, if some value hits something.
This is something from, I believe, the man that brought
the shader in the GLSL showpiece and you can make it run
in hardware by simply moving to the second form.
The second form basically says
I'm going to iterate five times.
We're going to unroll those five times and then
we're going to put the five if statements in.
So you don't want to have that complex loop part.
So fragment shader branching.
A less capable GPU is on the same
set of the older NVIDIA products,
the older kind of PowerPC generation kind
of ATI products and the new, the newer, the MacBooks.
We have less fragments.
Fragment shader branching not very supported.
One of the issues here is they only
have like 96 instructions, for example,
total with 32 texture instructions, 64 math instructions.
So you don't have a lot of instructions.
So let's say your loop is six instructions,
you know, that gives you the ten.
But let's say you have 15 other
instructions, well then it won't fit.
So the loop unrolling is going to blow both things up.
And additionally Sine, Cosine and Tangent,
those kind of things can expand out.
Some of the instructions can expand to larger set
of instructions so if you have one Syn you could do
that ten times in a shader and
you're out of instructions basically.
So remember that when you're working
with less capable hardware.
Conditionals, kind of same set of hardware.
I mean, the idea here is basically everything we've
shipped on an Intel, and this is not something, you know,
we designed it this way, this is where the state
of the hardware is when we did in transition.
Made a really nice spot for a transition.
Intel, mostly Intel hardware can really do fairly
well in the ATI and NVIDIA side can do well for GLSL.
So basically for conditionals you want to avoid
return break continue inside of conditionals.
And don't use if statements to call the
same function with a set of arguments.
It's just this is, this is a kind of
be nice to the compiler time, don't,
don't hurt your compiler, it's trying to be nice to you.
The first one basically says when we go through the
optimization step we see the two function calls and we have
to do a lot more work and to understand
that's what you're doing.
All you're doing is sending a value and calling a function.
So do the second one, select the value you
want to do and then call the function with it.
And that's really easy, the second one
is really easy to unroll and really easy
to work with, especially on these hardware.
But the latest generation hardware the first one's fine.
It just works.
So last thing is in working with
hardware, where is the cool shader stuff?
Where is that new kind of cool stuff?
So advanced shader support is on,
We have differencing functions.
We have some shader texture LOD.
We have noise functions and we have the final,
the fourth generation shading and support.
The differencing functions are on again.
The newest hard, the same set of hardware.
So it's the...it turns out the 5200, in this
cRase, has it so that drops down a little bit.
But all the, all the new Intel, ATI and NVIDIA hardware
has a differencing, or has a...I'm sorry, that's,
that's not, yeah, that's correct, that's correct.
I was thinking, noise is software only.
That's correct.
And the same thing with basically the shader texture LOD.
And then for noise support right
now we have noises in software only.
I believe by the time Leopard ships,
and I don't want to promise this,
but I believe we'll have a noise implementation
because we have enough space to do it, kind of in,
micro code is not the right word, but in software
what we do with kind of software insertion.
You call a noise and we're going to put a
block of code in that does the equivalent
of our software noise on the newest, the 8600.
But everything else is going to be dropped
to software if you try and do noise.
The thing you do here instead, which is a standard
technique, is shown even in the orange book is
to use a noise texture, 3D texture pregenerated noise.
You do a look up in it based on some values
and it'll give you a good noise function.
The noise, noise you can get a little bit
deeper but it works, that works pretty well.
And finally the fourth generation shading
support in hardware on the 8600 MGT and later
and in software we're going to
look to produce it everywhere.
So basically what happens is if you don't have hardware
geometry shader support your vertex processing will fall
back to the CPU, not a bad thing
depending on what you're doing.
I mean, if you're the latest generation 3D game app
it may not work for you but if you're doing an app
and you have a little bit CPU overhead, we have
multi-cores, it may work really well for you.
Again, economy of scale.
Few vertices, lots of fragments, the vertex and
geometry stuff is not executing a lot and it will base,
it'll very easily be able to fit it on that hardware
or on the CPU and that should happen automatically.
So that's what's new in Leopard.
So basically what we're going, What's new in Leopard,
we covered this last year and some of this has changed
but it, I just want to add a few things to it.
Fourth generation shading support,
we've already talked about that.
That was for geometry and GPU shaders,
binable uniforms, transform feedback.
We're improving the profiler to give shader
editing and we're adding a new shader builder.
Shading language one point two.
So in the shading language one point two stuff
basically all it does is add some new syntax
or new options to the shading language itself.
There's new specification out.
You can look at the details in it.
Some of the things we have, we have invariance so
you can use fixed function and programming together.
We have centroid variants for multi-sample, non-square
matrixes and we have additional built in functions.
Other things we've promoted arrays to first class objects.
We've added a link thing so you
can iterate over arrays in length.
There's automatic conversions from in to float.
So that's something that one point two has,
make it a little bit more convenient for you.
And finally uniform initializers, which
gives you the ability to have some basic,
some basic good values for your uniforms that you can
have to start with instead of starting from scratch.
So shader builder, you do not have it in your
beta but before Leopard ships we'll be seeding it
and you'll be able to, with, when Leopard
ships you'll have a new shader builder.
Basically it's kind of a combination between
our editor sample and the old shader builder.
It combines our programs and shaders.
It allows automatic compilation
parts in editing as you've seen.
It has a plug-in architecture of geometry.
We're going to give some little extensible.
It won't be the deepest architecture but it allows you to
bring in some of your own models and kind of work with that
and some of your own information into the vertex pipeline.
It's going to have much improved texture
handling for cube maps, 3D textures,
those kind of things and it'll be coming soon.
At the end I'll put up a CD mail if you're
interested in getting on our OpenGL CD you can do that
and we'll be CDing it to you at some point.
So I'm going to jump into a quick demo here
and just show you some debugging with the,
from OpenGLSL showpiece, which is what I showed you before.
And I'm going to open GL Profiler and kind of
show you how you can attach and debug a shader.
So we've attached and what I'm going to do is
I'm going to bring up the break point view.
And this, we'll talk about this tool more in depth
in one of our sessions on tuning this afternoon.
I'm going to break on the flush
and so now you see it stopped.
I have a back trace and what I can do is I
also have a view that's a resources view.
Resources view contains information about shaders.
So we click on that and you see a number of shader objects.
This is a program object that actually is drawing
the teapot and you can see it has the uniforms,
it has some of the built in uniforms,
it has some attributes.
We've all talked about that during
the day and has their current values.
You also can look at that it has actually
the fragment shader we have here in,
in the...it shows you the code you have.
So let's say I want to see actually how the
texture coordinates are represented on this teapot.
What I can do here instead of using the color value I got,
I'm just going to substitute it in, the GL text coord.
I can hit a compile thing.
It says compile succeeded.
And then I'm going to step through a
few frames and see what it shows me.
So in this case what it did was it basically ran that shader
and basically used the text coords as the output color.
And so you can use this kind of method to put things
in the output color and see what your shader is doing.
You can turn things on, turn things off while
you're running, debug your program on the fly
and so you don't always have to go out to your editor,
change some things and go back in your program.
So that's the idea here as we allow that
shader builder actually, or allow that.
You'd use Profiler to actually debug your
shaders without having to actually open
up your app, recompile your app all the time.
And we'll talk more about the nuances of using
Profiler, give you the touring, you will tour it,
talk about all the windows what they actually
do in the tuning session this afternoon.
And so that's, If you want to go learn more about
actually how to use a tool, we'll talk about it there.
So back to slides, please.
And finally I'm going to finish up with a
little bit on fourth generation shading support.
I don't want to go into too much depth.
I'm not going to try and teach you these
shading support today but I'll talk
to you about, give you an idea about what it is.
I think a lot of this stuff I've already talked
about and then we'll kind of review some of it.
So geometry shaders, creates new
primitive from existing ones.
It can be a single point, line or triangle input.
You also have adjacency information.
You have information that says what's beside
it so you can actually have a line strip.
And Alex will show you some things
in a few minutes about that.
The output is fixed.
You have to actually decide what it is.
Going in you have to say this geometry
shader has this kind of output.
I'm outputting triangles, for example.
So geometry shaders are kind of designed specifically
for the kind of output they're going to have.
They don't really on the fly change their output.
Line, point line strip, triangle strip
and you can output multiple primitives.
So you can have one set of triangles come
in and you can test light, for example.
So you can build out multiple primitives so you
can smooth your surface using a geometry shader.
It's executed after the vertex shader and before
the fragment shader, like we talked about.
And typical uses, point sprites so you can generate
geometry, you can have a point and generate geometry.
You can do tessellation.
You can do extreme shadow volumes.
We showed that yesterday.
And you can do some single pass rendering to a cube map.
The idea here is to get the work to the GPU.
The two things you need to know in your shader are
very simple, emit vertex and emit end primitive.
If you're going to do multiple primitives you have to end
primitive after each one, emit vertex for each vertex.
So the pass through one just goes emit vertex, emit vertex,
emit vertex, the same triangle that came in goes out.
That's geometry shader.
You'll be able to play with this. My recommendation
is wait for the next seed because we're going
to clean some things up and, but it is, it is
on in software right now on the beta you have.
GPU shader, haven't talked about this a lot.
It's really a grab bag of a lot of different stuff.
It allows you to basically do integer textures.
So it allows you to put a list of integers,
a big array into a texture and access them
like an integer rather than a floating point value.
I put the long list of different types it represents.
It's a huge spec, 38 pages.
I don't know if that's huge but 38 pages is a pretty
long spec. It has a lot of different stuff to it.
So what we're going to do is we're going to
implement this in kind of a roll out type fashion.
So in Leopard you'll see much of the integer operations
kind of just the basic stuff supported and we may roll,
as developers need it, as people request it and we
see the utility of it, we may roll pieces of it out.
We'll have dev notes to tell you what, you know, what's
supported and what's not supported but it really,
This is one of those things where some of the nuances of
it may not be particularly useful to a large audience.
And my request from you guys, if you have interest in GPU
shader and a particular part of it just send us an email
and we can take that and we'll take that into
consideration in our implementation plans.
But we want to get it out there for you, get you using it
and get some feed back and then
we'll continue to improve it.
Transform feed back, we talked about that.
It's pretty simple.
You can output from the geometry shader.
You can either output the primitive of geometry shader.
If you don't have, sorry.
Transform feed back technically does
not require the geometry shader.
I should have been clear about that.
Either the primitives of geometry are outputs our if you
don't have a geometry shader the set of vertices that go
out will be output and can be used
into a buffer and can be used again.
So basically rights to a buffer object.
You can use it as a vertex, the vertex buffer object
or you can use a different kind of buffer object.
So you can actually write to a buffer
and use it in a lot of different ways.
You can recover data, for example.
You can just output and recover data.
An example of this is you're, in
the C side of things are basically,
In this case I'm going to say I'm not rasterizing.
So I'm going to turn off the fragment side of stuff.
I'm going to set a buffer, buffer object
up and say, hey, here's the offset to it.
I'm going to begin transform feed back.
I'm going to draw some stuff.
And then I'm going to say, end transform feed back.
So basically what I did was I say, I'm going to short
circuit the API, feed it back through and get that data out.
So I rendered some stuff through the vertex
geometry shader and recovered some stuff.
So if I want to tessellate I recovered more
triangles than I put in in the first place.
Fairly simple concept in transform feed back.
And finally, bindable uniform.
Bindable uniform is really simply, it allows uniform sets.
You can set, It's an object of uniforms.
You can...Let's say you have a thousand uniforms in your
shader, a really complex shader, a thousand uniforms
and you have a different sets of uniforms, different
shaders that allows you to put those into an object
and kind of bind them to different places.
And since you can bind one set of
uniforms to different shaders it gives you,
If people are familiar with the program interface
it gives you the program ENV kind of thing.
One set of uniforms can affect shaders.
Basically uniform buffer EXT is what you
call to set it up and you're, to set it,
to set it and then it's only valid after you link.
So you link, you have a shader using and you can uniform
buffer to actually set the set of bindable uniforms.
The, May be a little bit confusing about it is
that you actually bind it and you modify values.
You're actually modifying it live.
When you unbind it those kind of go with you.
So it's, it's actually you bind your set of stuff, modify
your stuff and you can then unbind it, bind to another one.
So, I think that's all I want to talk about.
I'm going to bring Alex up and talk, and have him demo
some of the things you can do with geometry shaders.
Geometry shaders are real interesting
because it's not always about lines
and points, lines and points and triangles.
You can do a lot of different things
and he'll show you in some of his demos.
>> Thanks Jeff.
Ok, I'm going to show a few GLSL demos today.
Ok, my mic's on now.
Thanks Jeff.
I'm going to show a few different GLSL demos
today focusing on two of the new extensions,
geometry shaders and transform feed back.
I think two-thirds of you are new to GLSL
so today's probably the first time
you've ever heard about geometry shaders.
So before we jump into the demos let's take a
look at the codes, review what it looks like.
So here I have two really simple shaders.
Can we get the demo machine, please?
Ok. So two really simple shaders.
On the top a vertex shader.
This is just doing the simplest
possible transform of incoming vertex.
And remember, vertex shaders work on one vertex at a time.
They always output one vertex.
This is a standard transform model view
projection times the incoming vertex position.
Geometry shaders, there's really
three key points here to keep in mind.
I'll just recap what Jeff said.
The first point is that they work on specific types
of inputs and create specific types of outputs.
So you have to, when you compile and link the
program object together you have to tell it what type
of input is this geometry shader going to work
on and what type of output is it going to create.
So it might be working with points or lines or triangles
and it's going to output points or lines or triangles.
There's also adjacency inputs, lines of
adjacency and triangles with adjacency.
I'll touch on that a little later in the demo.
So the second point is that in the geometry
shader you're working on arrays of inputs.
The vertex shader output the single
position, from the geometry shader's viewpoint
that thing is an array, is a geo position in.
And this particular shader works with the
points so I only have to touch index zero.
If this was lines I'd have zero and one, if
it was triangles I'd have zero, one and two.
And you could do math between those
things to find the midpoints
or do any other kind of weighted average you wanted on them.
Third point is this new function here.
You have to explicitly emit vertices.
In a vertex shader you're always implicitly working on
one vertex and you set whatever attributes you care about,
the color, the texture coordinate, the position.
And when your shader is executed those
things are done, the vertex comes out.
In a geometry shader, same thing, you
set up the attributes you care about.
Here I'm doing texture coordinates in a position, then
I explicitly emit a vertex, change the attributes,
emit another vertex, change the attributes and so on.
This shader is taking one point in and it's going to take
a point and kind of project a screen aligned quad around it
so that it can kind of transform points
into textured billboards basically.
So there's just some constants here and it just basically
calculates the top left and the lower right and so on.
And there's hard coded texture coordinates just go from zero
to one and I end up with a textured sprite on the screen.
So kind of real simple geometry shader example.
Ok, let's go to a couple demos.
( Silence )
So it's everybody's favorite teapot.
Everyone's seen this before.
What's new here?
So this is the natural progression of the teapot.
It has to emit some steam.
So what's going on here and what does
this have to do with geometry shader?
Well, the way this is working is I'm drawing this twice.
First it's just a regular teapot,
nothing special about this.
The second time though I draw it again as points.
And these points are fed into a geometry shader.
Inside the geometry shader it's a slightly more
complicated version of what I just showed you in code.
And each point can conditionally emit
zero or one or more screen aligned quads.
Right? And these quads are actually inside a particle
system implemented inside the geometry shader,
which has a single input time and as time
progresses I make them go up and they get bigger
and the color changes and they rotate a little bit.
So it's just a simple particle system.
There's a texture applied to those things.
So the fragment shader can texture each of the quads.
And the result can be blended into the scene like this.
Now you notice that only the spout of
the teapot is emitting the steam here.
Well, it's really simple to do this because
you're working on the incoming vertex position.
I can simply compare on the shader if the position is
inside this area then emit something, otherwise, don't emit.
So you can emit zero if you, if you,
zero vertices out if you want to.
So I'll let this go.
Over time maybe some more parts of the teapot start to emit.
( Silence )
And so there you go.
A simple example of points in, bill boarded
quads out, the particles in geometry shader.
Ok, so another demo, slightly different kind of input.
I call this kind of the paper doll demo.
What is this going to look like?
It's going to look something like this.
So what's going on here?
This is adaptive tessellation of
an input mesh in a geometry shader.
In this case the input is lines.
And so on the left here I have the original
mesh, this is drawn with fix function.
This has about 30 points in th0e line loop, really
simple, the simplest kind of mesh I could think of.
And on the right the same thing
but drawn with a geometry shader.
So how is this working?
Well, this time the input type is
lines with adjacency information.
What that means is that the working unit
in the geometry shader is one line segment.
Let's take the segment that's atop this
guy's head, but you also have access
to the lines immediately adjacent
on either side of that data.
So in the array this would be zero,
one, two, three points I can work with.
If it had those four points accessible I can then
calculate a weighted supply that runs through all of them
and I can emit as many subdivisions as I want
calculating the points at each subdivision.
So that's pretty neat.
What else can I do with this?
Well, similar to how the teapot was working conditionally
only at certain positions, there's another new built
in variable in geometry shader called primitive ID.
Every single primitive that's coming in
here has a unique number associated with it.
So like if I start drawing this mesh at the guy's neck,
this might be line segment one and two and three and so on.
That's another variable I can key on in a
shader and conditionally apply effects with.
That's regardless of the position
like in the teapot example.
It's, I can rotate the mesh and do
whatever I want, it's still line segment one.
So maybe I'll displace just the segments in
this guy's head to grow some hair on him.
And all these things are running
live every time you draw this mesh.
So if I animate the original mesh the updated mesh is
tessellated appropriately every single time I draw it.
And as Jeff is getting across this whole entire session,
you have complete creative control
over every thing you do in the shader.
So it's really simple to apply any kind
of effects you want to this geometry.
Let's get this guy's hip shaking, make him
dance around and now it's an iPod commercial.
( Laughter )
So this is a simple 2D example with lines but you
can see how, from the CP's point of view here,
you're only working with 30 points and the CP load on this
just to animate like this guy's hand is almost nothing.
But on the GP's side you can tessellate this as much as
you want and create thousands or hundreds of thousands
of vertices on it and make it look really good.
Ok, so the next demo is a little different.
I'm using, I'm going to use geometry
shader again and also transform feed back.
So it's a less complicated one.
It's one line.
Actually it's one line and three uniforms.
So can you guess what's going to happen here?
Right. So I'm creating a fractal with this.
So how is this working?
So it's the same kind of subdivision as a the
previous example where I have one input line segment
and I'm using these uniforms as the
relative offsets into that line and I break
up the incoming segment into four line segments coming out.
But instead of drawing to the screen
I can capture the output positions
into a VBO with a transfer feed back extension.
Then guess what?
I just turn around and I draw that VBO with the same
geometry shader and on the first line when it comes in
and it gets subdivided again and the second line and so on.
And I can repeat over that as many
times as I want to build up detail.
Now what's cool is I can animate the uniforms per frame by
just dragging the points around and now I've got this kind
of interactive fractal shape that
I can do whatever I want with.
So that's neat but still drawing this thing as
one line segment isn't as cool as it could be.
So let's try to be a little more creative and
artistic and see what else we can do with it.
So the first thing is instead of drawing this as lines,
what if I emit just the points and I feed those points again
to another geometry shader just like the one
I showed you in the beginning that's going
to turn each incoming point into a textured quad.
So there you see I'm just drawing a bunch of textured balls
now, which already makes it look a lot more complicated
because you can see some interactions
happening with the alpha.
What else can I do with this?
Let's try randomizing the point size.
I can do this with the noise functions in GLSL.
Here I'm actually using a texture look-up in the
geometry shader to look at some random texture data.
Remember that texture look-ups are available to
vertex and geometry shaders not just fragment shaders.
And I could do the same thing with, say,
the color that I pick for each of these.
So now it's looking a lot more complicated and organic.
Let's apply a little bit of dot
product magic and a fragment shader.
So now I've got this much more interesting
looking microorganism kind of thing.
And to finish this off let's try animating some
more of these attributes like the point size
and apply some random displacement to everything.
So now I've got a very complicated looking
scene, which is completely interactive.
And remember all of this was generated from one line
segment with three uniforms I'm touching per frame.
All the extra geometry here is being calculated
and animated and actually created on the fly
in the shader where we can accelerate that on the GPU.
So I think that's the end of the demo here.
I just want to say that there's a lot more
of these effects that you can come up with.
You could be doing the same kind
of tessellation with 3D objects.
You could be doing shadow extrusion.
There's just a kind of unlimited
world of possibilities here.
So please go to OpenGL dot org,
download the specs and read through them
and try experimenting with all the stuff yourself.
Thanks.
( Applause )
>> We'll go back to the slides and I'll finish up here.
So programmable GPU's are here.
GLSL ships everywhere.
It's a, OpenGL Shading Language it
is approachable, understandable,
direct, fast way to get at the power of the GPU.
It's our focus and we'd really
like to have it be your focus.
Moving forward we're going to be doing a C program.
We're continuing from last year.
OpenGL C dot Apple dot com.
What we'ree going to try and do is get you new graphic
drivers, new OpenGL to allow you to work on top of Leopard
and really give us some feed back on what you have.
If you find any bugs we can get those quick
turn fixed to you and you can make sure
that Leopard is a really great thing to use
these new features and use OpenGL and GLSL.
I don't think we have time for questions
today but I want to bring up Alan's name.
Alan Schaeffer (sp?) is our 2D, 3D evangelist
and if you have questions specific you can
go to him for kind of generic questions.
There's obviously the sample code and resources there